READING 1
THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF RISK
MANAGEMENT
Study Session 1
EXAM FOCUS
This introductory reading provides coverage of fundamental risk management concepts
that will be discussed in much more detail throughout the FRM curriculum. For the
exam, it is important to understand the general risk management process and its
potential shortcomings, the concept of unexpected loss, and some of the underlying
points regarding the relationship between risk and reward. Also, the material on the
main categories of financial and nonfinancial risks contains several testable concepts.
MODULE 1.1: INTRODUCTION TO RISK MANAGEMENT
LO 1.a: Explain the concept of risk and compare risk management with risk taking.
In an investing context, risk is the uncertainty surrounding outcomes. Investors are
generally more concerned about negative outcomes (unexpected investment losses)
than they are about positive surprises (unexpected investment gains). Additionally,
there is an observed natural trade-off between risk and return; opportunities with high
risk have the potential for high returns and those with lower risk also have lower
return potential.
Risk is not necessarily related to the size of the potential loss. For example, many
potential losses are large but are quite predictable and can be accounted for using risk
management techniques. The more important concern is the variability of the loss,
especially an unexpected loss that could rise to unexpectedly high levels.
As a starting point, risk management includes the sequence of activities aimed to
reduce or eliminate an entity’s potential to incur expected losses. On top of that, there
is the need to manage the unexpected variability of some costs. In managing both
expected and unexpected losses, risk management can be thought of as a defensive
technique. However, risk management is actually broader in the sense that it considers
how an entity can consciously determine how much risk it is willing to take to earn
future uncertain returns. The concept of risk taking refers to the active acceptance of
incremental risk in the pursuit of incremental gains. In this context, risk taking can be
thought of as an opportunistic action.
The Risk Management Process
The risk management process is a formal series of actions designed to determine if
the perceived reward justifies the expected risks. A related query is whether the risks
could be reduced and still provide an approximately similar reward.
There are several core building blocks in the risk management process. They are as
follows:

1. Identify risks.
2. Measure and manage risks.
3. Distinguish between expected and unexpected risks.
4. Address the relationships among risks.
5. Develop a risk mitigation strategy.
6. Monitor the risk mitigation strategy and adjust as needed.

Risk managers can deploy several methods to identify relevant risks. The various types
of risk are discussed later in this reading, but for now, focus on the identification
process. One method to identify risks is brainstorming, which involves soliciting from
key business leaders all potential known risks influencing their supervision area. These
key leaders may also survey their subordinates (and especially frontline personnel) for
a deeper understanding of relevant risks. There may be industry-level resources (e.g.,
regulatory standards, industry surveys, or expert opinions) that are also available. For a
more quantitative approach, a risk manager can analyze actual loss data to discern the
magnitudes and frequency of various losses. Scenario analysis is another common tool
used for identifying risks.
Part of the risk identification process is to filter risks into degrees of being known or
unknown. Figure 1.1 illustrates that risks can move along a spectrum from being
expected (i.e., known) to being fully unknown. The unknown category can be subdivided
into the known unknowns (i.e., Knightian uncertainty) and the unknown unknowns. The
former are items that may impact a firm, while the latter are truly unknown (i.e., tail
risk events). Where possible, risk managers should move a risk into the known
category, but this does not work for risks that cannot be quantified.
Figure 1.1: Loss Categories

The risk management process involves a four-way decision. The company might decide
to avoid risk directly by selling a product line, avoiding certain markets or
jurisdictions, or offshoring production. They also might decide to retain risk, depending
on the expected rewards relative to the probability and frequency of any expected
losses. Another option is to mitigate risk by reducing either the magnitude or the
frequency of exposure to a given risk factor. Finally, risk managers could transfer risk to
a third party using derivatives or structured products. They could also purchase
insurance to outsource risk to an insurance company.
One of the challenges in ensuring that risk management will be beneficial to the
economy is that risk must be sufficiently dispersed among willing and able participants
in the economy. Unfortunately, a notable failure of risk management occurred during
the financial crisis of 2007–2009 when it was subsequently discovered that risk was
too concentrated among too few participants.
Another challenge of the risk management process is that it has failed to consistently
assist in preventing market disruptions or preventing financial accounting fraud (due to
corporate governance failures). For example, the existence of derivative financial
instruments greatly facilitates the ability to assume high levels of risk and the tendency
of risk managers to follow each other’s actions (e.g., selling risky assets during a market
crisis, which disrupts the market by increasing its volatility).
In addition, the use of derivatives as complex trading strategies assisted in overstating
the financial position (i.e., net assets on balance sheet) of many entities and
complicating the level of risk assumed by many entities. Even with the best risk
management policies in place, using such inaccurate information would not allow the
policies to be effective.
Finally, risk management may not be effective on an overall economic basis because it
only involves risk transferring by one party and risk assumption by another party. It
does not result in overall risk elimination. In other words, risk management can be
thought of as a zero-sum game in that some “winning” parties will gain at the expense of
some “losing” parties. However, if enough parties suffer devastating losses due to an
excessive assumption of risk, it could lead to a widespread economic crisis.
Measuring and Managing Risk
LO 1.b: Evaluate, compare, and apply tools and procedures used to measure and
manage risk, including quantitative measures, qualitative risk assessment
techniques, and enterprise risk management.
Quantitative Risk Measures
Value at risk (VaR) calculates an estimated loss amount given a certain probability of
occurrence. For example, a financial institution may have a one-day VaR of $2.5 million
at the 95% confidence level. That would be interpreted as having a 5% chance that
there will be a loss greater than $2.5 million on any given day. VaR is a useful measure
for liquid positions operating under normal market circumstances over a short period
of time. It is less useful and potentially dangerous when attempting to measure risk in
non-normal circumstances, in illiquid positions, and over a long period of time.
To further illustrate the concept of VaR, assume you have gathered 1,000 monthly
returns for a security, and produced the histogram shown in Figure 1.2. You decide that
you want to compute the monthly VaR for this security at a confidence level of 95%. At
a 95% confidence level, the lower tail displays the lowest 5% of the underlying
distribution’s returns. For this distribution, the value associated with a 95% confidence
level is a return of −15.5%. If you have $1,000,000 invested in this security, the one-month VaR is $155,000 (−15.5% × $1,000,000).
Figure 1.2: Histogram of Monthly Returns
PROFESSOR’S NOTE
The VaR calculated using Figure 1.2 is an example of historical VaR. In Book
4, you will learn about other approaches for calculating VaR.
Economic capital is the amount of liquid capital necessary to cover unexpected losses.
For example, if one-day VaR is $2.5 million and the entity holds $2.5 million in liquid
reserves, then they have sufficient economic capital (i.e., they are unlikely to go
bankrupt in a one-day expected tail risk event).
Qualitative Risk Assessment
Scenario analysis is a process that considers potential future risk factors and the
associated alternative outcomes. The typical method is to compare a best-case scenario
to a worst-case scenario, which shocks variables to their extreme known values. This
process factors the potential impact of several categories of risk and influences risk
manager decision making by attempting to put a value on an otherwise qualitative
concept (i.e., what-if analysis). This exercise is an attempt to understand the assumed
full magnitude of potential losses even if the probability of the loss is very small.
Stress testing is a form of scenario analysis that examines a financial outcome based
on a given “stress” on the entity. This technique adjusts one parameter at a time to
estimate the impact on the firm. For example, it is plausible for interest rates to adjust
severely in an economic crisis. Stress testing will estimate the impact of this one
parameter on the entity.
There are two types of parameters that could be considered using either scenario
analysis or stress testing. The first type of parameter is historically sourced. This
parameter has the benefit of being observable, but the past trend may not continue into
the future. The second type of parameter is an estimated variable, which is a
hypothetical forecast based on a risk manager’s assumptions. This approach can
introduce estimation error and model risk, but it may be a useful exercise to fully
understand a firm’s sensitivity to qualitative risk factors.
Enterprise Risk Management
In practice, the term enterprise risk management (ERM) refers to a general process
by which risk is managed within an organization. An ERM system is highly integrative
in that it is deployed at the enterprise level and not siloed at the department level. The
value in this top-down approach is that risk is not considered independently, but rather
in relation to its potential impact on multiple divisions of a company.
One challenge with the ERM approach is a tendency to reduce risk management to a
single value (e.g., either VaR or economic capital). This attempt is too simplistic in a
dynamic-risk environment. Risk managers learned from the financial crisis of 2007–
2009 that risk is multi-dimensional, and it requires consideration from various vantage
points. Risk also develops across different risk types, as you will learn later in this
reading. The reality is that proper application of an ERM framework requires both
statistical analysis and informed judgment on the part of risk managers.
The ultimate goal of an ERM is to understand company-wide risks and to integrate risk
planning into strategic business planning. If the risk management process does not link
information with action, then it is an exercise in futility. ERM is not just about risk
aggregation at the company level. It considers risk holistically and its appropriate
influence on strategic planning for an organization.
Expected and Unexpected Loss
LO 1.c: Distinguish between expected loss and unexpected loss and provide
examples of each.
Expected loss (EL) considers how much an entity expects to lose in the normal course
of business. These losses can be calculated through statistical analysis with relative
reliability over short time horizons. The EL of a portfolio can generally be calculated as
a function of: (1) the probability of a risk occurring; (2) the dollar exposure to the risk
event; and (3) the expected severity of the loss if the risk event does occur.
For example, a retail business that provides credit terms on sales of goods to its
customers (i.e., no need to pay immediately) incurs the risk of nonpayment by some of
those customers. If the business has been in operation for at least a few years, it could
use its operating history to reasonably estimate the percentage of annual credit sales
that will never be collected. The amount of the loss is therefore predictable and is
treated as a regular cost of doing business (i.e., bad debt expense on the income
statement). It can be priced into the cost of the goods directly in the case of the retail
business. In a banking context, EL could be modeled as the product of a borrower’s
probability of default (PD), the bank’s exposure at default (EAD), and the magnitude of
the loss given default (LGD).
EL = EAD × PD × LGD
Banks will often address ELs by charging a higher spread (and possibly a shorter time
horizon) for riskier borrowers. Most expected losses can be logically considered as a
function of several more granular losses.
PROFESSOR’S NOTE
When EL can be modeled with confidence, it can be treated like a
predictable expense or a variable cost.
Unexpected loss considers how much an entity could lose in excess of their average
(expected) loss scenarios. There is considerable challenge involved with predicting
unexpected losses because they are, by definition, unexpected.
For example, consider a commercial loan portfolio that is focused on loans to
automotive manufacturing companies. During an economic expansion that favors such
companies (because individuals have more disposable income to spend on items such
as automobiles), the lender will realize very few, if any, loan defaults. However, during
an economic recession, there is less disposable income to spend and many more loan
defaults are likely to occur from borrowers. It is also likely that many of these losses
will be clustered at the same time. This is an example of correlation risk, when
unfavorable events happen together. The correlation risk drives potential losses to
unexpected levels.
Another example of correlation risk lies with real estate loans secured by real property.
Borrowers tend to default on loans (i.e., default rate risk) at the same time that the real
property values fall (i.e., recovery rate risk—the creditor’s collateral is worth less,
thereby compromising the recovery rate on the funds lent to the borrowers). These two
risks occurring simultaneously could also bring potential losses to unexpected levels.
The Relationship Between Risk and Reward
LO 1.d: Interpret the relationship between risk and reward and explain how
conflicts of interest can impact risk management.
As previously mentioned, there is a natural trade-off between risk and reward. In
general, the greater the risk taken, the greater the potential reward. However, one must
consider the variability of the potential reward. The portion of the variability that is
measurable as a probability function could be thought of as risk (EL) whereas the
portion that is not measurable could be thought of as uncertainty (unexpected loss).
For example, government bonds have less credit/default risk than corporate bonds.
Therefore, government bonds will trade with lower yields than corporate bonds (all
else equal). However, for a given maturity, the full relationship between risk and return
goes further than merely credit risk (e.g., liquidity risks and taxation impacts may make
the relationship less clear). Additionally, the risk tolerances (i.e., ability and willingness
to take on certain risks) of market participants may change over time. When risk
tolerances are high, the spread between riskless and risky bonds may narrow to an
abnormally low level, which again disguises the true relationship between risk and
return
PROFESSOR’S NOTE
The risk/reward trade-off becomes much more complex to analyze for
assets that are either thinly traded or not publicly traded. This is especially
true for illiquid assets.
Because risk and reward are linked, it is very important for risk managers to properly
consider relevant risks. As previously mentioned, a bank’s EL could be modeled as the
product of a borrower’s PD, the bank’s EAD, and the magnitude of the LGD. Risk
managers could drill down on the PD to discern underlying loss drivers that need to be
monitored. Some of the drivers could be the borrower’s financial condition (e.g., sales
growth trends, input cost trends, etc.) or it could be an external factor (e.g., weakening
global trade or unfavorable tax policy changes). The potential list of loss drivers could
be exhaustive. The advent of artificial intelligence and machine learning greatly
enhances a risk manager’s ability to consider and isolate economically important loss
drivers to monitor.
In complex systems (e.g., financial markets), extreme unexpected losses (risk)
sometimes occur. These tail risk events can be tragic for a risk management system.
This is especially true when the correlation between risk factors increases. The triggers
for lockstep movement between risk factors could be structural changes such as
behavioral shifts, industry trends, government interventions, and new innovations.
Danger arises when the frequency of tail events increases because the pace of structural
uncertainty accelerates.
One of the biggest structural concerns is the potential for conflicts of interest. Those in
the position to be most aware of the presence, probability, and potential impact of
various risk factors are sometimes the ones who try to profit from its presence. This
reality could be seen in the actions of rogue traders. It may also be seen from managers
who conceal knowledge of a risk factor to maximize short-term stock price movements
to enhance personal compensation through stock-based remuneration structures.
The best way to combat the potential for conflicts of interest to skew risk recognition
is the following three-step process:

1. Risk recognition by frontline employees and division managers.
2. A robust risk management system with daily oversight.
3. Periodic independent audits to ensure that steps 1 and 2 are functioning properly.

## MODULE QUIZ 1.1

Which of the following statements regarding risk and risk management is correct?
A. Risk management is more concerned with unexpected losses than expected losses.
B. There is a relationship between the amount of risk taken and the size of the
potential loss.
C. The final step of the risk management process involves developing a risk mitigation
strategy.
D. If executed properly, the risk management process may allow for risk elimination
within an economy.

Which of the following items is not a building block of the risk management process?
A. Identifying relevant risk.
B. Measuring risks.
C. Avoiding all known risks.
D. Attempting to quantify any expected losses.

Examining the impact of a dramatic increase in interest rates on the value of a bond
investment portfolio could be performed using which of the following tools?
I. Stress testing.
II. Enterprise risk management.
C. I only.
D. II only.
E. Both I and II.
F. Neither I nor II.

Which of the following items would be associated with unexpected losses?
I. Loan defaults are increasing simultaneously while recovery rates are decreasing.
II. Lending losses are covered by charging a spread between the cost of funds and the
lending rate.
C. I only.
D. II only.
E. Both I and II.
F. Neither I nor II.

Which of the following statements is incorrect with respect to the relationship between
risk factors?
A. The risk/reward trade-off is easier to consider for individual stocks than for private
equity investments.
B. Risk management conflicts of interest can be easily mitigated through stock-based
compensation.
C. Risk managers should consider granular loss drivers.
D. Risk management conflicts of interest can be mitigated through periodic internal
audits.
